So another useful Java keyword is final.
You use that generally to
define constant values.
So strictly speaking,
final fields are not actually constants,
because they can be modified but
only once, and
any modification must be performed
before the class constructor finishes.
So what that means is that we can
assign a final field it's value
either when we first declare it,
or in the constructor.
So as an example,
we'll create a test class here.
We'll just call it some class.
Some class.
So we can create a final variable here.
And we can create the final
field as a private,
final int instanceNumber equals 1.
So I can do it in there.
I'll just tidy that up a bit...we could
also do it in the constructor, like so,
we could put something
like...instanceNumber equals 1.
Now, both of these examples
obviously do the same thing.
The field instance number set to 1 and
because it was marked
final its value can't be changed
any where else in the class, or
if we made it public from any
where outside of the class either.
But in this case it's usual to assign
the value and declaring the field,
but if you prefer you can
use a constructor instead.
Now one reason why you might want to and
might need to initialize the variable in
the constructor Would be if its value is a
result of some calculation that you know,
perhaps relies on some other code as
such as a method from another class.
As an example,
when reading a record from a database,
you might wanna store the class instances
unique database's key which wouldn't be
available until you read the record from
the database but then ready to create
the class instance from the database field
So we haven't created databases yet.
So that's a mechanism to
show how this would work.
What we'll do is we'll
create a mechanism for
ensuring that every instance of a class
has a unique instance number, or ID.
What this will require is for
us to track a variable each time
a new class instance is created.
So this is an ideal candidate for
using a class variable.
As we saw in the previous lecture.
So what we'll do is we'll
make instance number public,
to make it easy to demonstrate
that it can't be changed.
But normally,
when doing this you'd make it private.
So I'm gonna change this now,
this public final and instance number.
I'm gonna remove the initialization.
And as I mentioned I'm
gonna change it to public.
So what we'll also do is we'll, how about,
study variable...call it class counter.
Set that equal to 0.
Then we need a string for a name,
so private--final string name.
So, we're gonna have constructor.
We know we're going accept a parameter.
And this is IntelliiJ complaining
that it may not be initialized but
we'll fix that in our code shortly.
So, we use a parameter for
the constructor.
This.name = name and
now IntelliJ's happy on line 10.
And we'll increment the class counter.
Because we're instantiating
a new version of this class and
we'll say instanceNumber
equal to classCounter.
Then what we'll do is,
we'll output name
created, instance is + instanceNumber.
So that's our constructor.
Now we just want to put
a getter there as well.
So we're going to put getter for
our instance number.
Like so.
So let's go back now to main and
create some instances of this class.
So we'll put SomeClass one
equals new SomeClass "one".
SomeClass two equals
new SomeClass "two" and
SomeClass three is new SomeClass "three"
So if we run that, We
can see unlike in the discussion of static
where we had a getter for the static field and
we always got the same value,
whichever class this is recorded on,
here we're actually storing the
incremented static value in a class field.
And so each instance of a class
will maintain its own value, For
instance number, as we can see.
So, just to demonstrate that,
what I mean, is we can put
one.getInstanceNumber...two.
two.getInstanceNumber and
three.getInstanceNumber.
So, if we run that, And
notice how they're all maintaining
their own value for instance number.
So by making instance number final,
the value, its value can't be changed
once the class instance has been created.
So, attempting to do so will give
an error, and the code won't even compile.
As an example.
For instance,
we set instance number to a public.
one.InstanceNumber
InstanceNumber equal four,
we actually get an error immediately.
Cannot assign a value to final
variable instanceNumber.
So it's actually a good idea to mark
variables as final whenever you
know that the value shouldn't be changed
once the initial value's been set.
And a constant value Would be
an ideal candidate for that.
That said though, you may be used to
seeing constant values in Java you have
done some coding before declared using
static final and that is more normal for
constant, our instance number
here going back to the code
was not being treated as a constant
because we didn't want to assign its value but
we only wanted to assign it once and we
didn't want it to change after that point.
And that is also why we didn't use
uppercase for the variable name
If you remember from the discussion
on naming conventions,
constant variable names
should be in upper case.
So why are constants
declared a static final?
Well the reason is that if the value
really is a constant and won't change,
then it doesn't make sense to store a copy
of that in every single class instance.
They all hold the same value so
it makes sense to store it
only once at the class level.
So hence, values that are constant
are usually declared using static final.
We can see examples of this right
throughout the Java framework.
One example is in the Math package.
So if we go back to our main method.
And I'll just out that error.
We could do something like print out math
using the Java Math library.pi.
And that's pi in uppercase there.
And if we just hover over that and
have a look, public, static,
final, double pi you can see there and
it's obviously got the value of pi.
So it's declared as a public
static final double.
So it's usual to assign the value
of static field variables at
the time they're declared but again they
can be done after in a similar manner
to non-static final fields and
we'll see that shortly.
First, though,
we'll stay with the Math class,
because we want to have a look
at another use of final, so
what we're going to do is we'll just
make a little bit of a change here,
to create an instance of Math so
we can do some sums.
So, we're gonna type after that line,
Math m equals new Math.
Oh dear.
Unfortunately that doesn't work,
and we get the error.
Math has private access in Java.Lang.Math.
So, we just hover over that.
So, if we right click on that now to go
to the class declaration Declaration.
You can see there,
there's actually a comment above the code.
And it says,
don't let anyone instantiate this class.
And so the reason we're getting that
error is the constructor has been
marked private.
And that's to prevent, as you saw in our code
instances of it being created and
the reason I did that in the next class
is all the next Math class' methods
are static as well and they are all
available without requiring instance. So to
make that clear and to actually enforce it,
the creators of this class, the math
class, made the constructor private and
that prevents any instances from being created.
Now, ah! you might think,
I can get around that by creating a
subclass of math Which I can instantiate.
Unfortunately or actually fortunately,
creators have thought of this as well and
have stopped you from wasting your time by
declaring the Math class up here as final.
So, by marking a class as final,
applying that to a class, it prevents
the class from being sub-classed so
any attempt to extend Math will fail
because it's been marked final.
So just to confirm that.
Try extends math and
you are going to get an error.
There is no default constructor available and
that also has to do with the fact that it
is only when you have got
a private instructor.
So I'm just gonna undo that.
The bottom line is that anyway
by marking a class as final,
you can prevent your class
from being subclassed.
Now its possible that you might wish that
a class you're creating to be extended or
subclassed, but you might have one or more
methods that are crucial to the correct
operation of your class But you don't
want just those to be overridden.
So, in that case, marking the methods
as final will prevent them
from being overridden, even if you do
allow the class itself to be subclassed.
So, just to demonstrate that, I'll close
down this Math.java now, and
we'll create a new class.
We'll call it public,
we'll call it password.
And I'll just close down the wrong window.
So, let's firstly create
a static final int key.
Key equals 748576362, could be any number.
Private final int encrypted password.
We'll create a constructor, and
we'll pass the password in.
What we'll do is we'll also
have an encrypt function so,
the password would come in just
as a password and encrypted and
move our function to
encrypt the password so
So I'm writing a function that
will encrypt or decrypt and
then save it into the encrypted password,
which is encrypted at that point.
And let's do something really simple
there with the encryptDecrypt.
This is just an example.
Private int encryptDecrypt setting
a parameter of the password
And, which return password.
key.set.
And, that's using an XOR
to XOR the values there.
And, then we'll store the passwords so
we need another one, more public.
public void
storePassword
Saving password as
This dot encrypted password.
Sorry, encrypted password.
And we would test it to confirm, or
to check whether the password's valid.
So I'm gonna type public.
public boolean letMeIn which accepts
a password as a parameter.
Then we will put if encrypted--
encryptDecrypt
password is equal to password on file.
Then we will print some sort of
welcome message, welcome return true,
else "Nope you cannot come in" return false
And that should have up there,
that shouldn't change,
that should be just password.
We're passing the unencrypted password
to the encryptDecrypt method.
So, the encryption, as I mentioned,
is a very basic XOR Which just
checks the bits in the two values and
returns a 1 in any position where there
is a 1 in only one of the values.
So if you apply the XOR operation to the
result you get back your original value.
It does have applications in
the field of cryptography.
Although used in a much, much more
complex manner than what I've done there.
So in main, go back to main now.
Get rid of the other error
I am going to create a new password instance,
called storePassword so
we are going to put password equals
674312 equal
Password password= new Password (pw).
Then we'll put password.storePassword.
So if you run that Saving
password as 747902050,
and of course that's completely different
to the number that we passed to it.
Now this is an example of why you'd
want to prevent one of your methods
from being overwritten, not as an example
of how to encrypt storing in a database.
So cryptography is a very complex subject.
And I would strongly advise you to use an
existing cryptography library, if you ever
really needed to encrypt passwords or
anything else for that matter.
By all means, write your own cryptography
library once you've completed [LAUGH]
a PhD in the subject, but
until then don't be tempted.
Trust me on this one.
So anyway, getting back to our example,
the constructor getting back to our code
So the constructor takes the password and
encrypts it as you can see and encrypts it
setting a field storing the encryptability
so that can be checked when
the user attempts to log in.
So lets call the letMeIn method, with a few passwords
to check to see if it is working.
So I came back down here Now,
main, so, we stored the passwords,
we'll now see if we can,
get in the password.letMein 1.
password.letMeIn 523266
And this makes this a bit easier for
copying.
We'll try another one, 9773.
Try another one, maybe 0.
-1.
Then we'll do our correct currently 674312.
So if we run that, we should get an error
on all of them other than the last one.
Nope, you cannot come into the first five,
and then the last one Welcome,
we're able to get in because we
specific the right password.
So you can see that work and
the last example correctly logged us in.
The first five entries, the first
five passwords we tried all failed.
But the problem actually comes
if someone overrides the stored
password method in the sub class.
So I'm gonna end the video here, but in
the next video we'll extend on from that.
And talk about the problems, and want to
actually create a new class that extends
from this one, and show you how to
get around the issues that will come up.
So, see you in the next video.